---
layout: distill
title: Prol. Things That I Find Interesting Outside of Neuroscience
description: An utterly unnecessary and uninspiring explanation for why this blog exist.
giscus_comments: true
date: 2023-12-15
thumbnail: assets/img/feynman.png

authors:
  - name: Kelvin Chen
    url: "https://k9chen.github.io/"
    affiliations:
      name: None


bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Romance Dawn




# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: justify;
    text-justify: inter-word;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: justify;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
  div {
    text-align: justify;
    text-justify: inter-word;
  }
---
## Romance Dawn

There was a time during high school where my history teacher asked the class on our thoughts regarding the greatest man-made invention. Many of my peers had responded with "the light bulb" or "the World Wide Web," which were all reasonable answers. When it was my turn to answer, I bluntly spoke one word: "Calculus." Upon hearing my response, everyone in the class started glancing at me in disbelief, thinking that they must have misheard what I said. My rationale rests in the ways with which calculus have enabled us to understand the dynamics of the natural world in various ways, yet it seems that my peers did not perceive calculus to be what I had in mind. While my answer was nowhere near what my history teacher was looking for, i.e. Gutenberg's printing press, it did reinforce the notion that there is an obvious dissonance between myself and others, whereby the things that I find interesting appears to have little to no value in the eyes of others. I thus came to the realization that the problem, of note, lies not within the people themselves but in the ways with which materials are presented to the public consciousness.

As a premature academic invested in research and teaching, I often find myself being intrigued by many things beyond the realm of my own areas of research, including, inter alia, cosmology, quantum mechanics, mathematics, game theory, philosophy, literature, artificial intelligence, and their relations with one another. Indeed, perhaps it is my diverse set of interests that originally drew me to something as interdisciplinary as neuroscience, where I could discover its intricate connections with other (un)related ideas and concepts. Sadly, it is not within my power to study all of these things in-depth in the course of one lifetime, for I am not a Renaissance man like da Vinci by any means. Nevertheless, having a layman's understanding of the said topics is sufficient to stimulate my mind insofar as challenging the conventional perceptions and attitudes toward human thought. Considering the volume of intellectual knowledge that exist since the dawn of time, this blog thus becomes a tabula rasa for recording them as I embark upon this journey via writing, thereby allowing me to appreciate the ingenuity of mankind and how much I do not know about the world.   

*Note:* The thumbnail of this post is a Feynman diagram representing the annihilation of an electron-positron pair to render the emission of a photon followed by photodisintegration to reform the electron-positron pair ([Image Source](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1107.0434)).
