---
layout: distill
title: Prol. Things That I Find Interesting Outside of Neuroscience
description: An utterly unnecessary and uninspiring explanation for why this blog exist.
giscus_comments: true
date: 2023-12-15
thumbnail: assets/img/holy.png

authors:
  - name: Kelvin Chen
    url: "https://k9chen.github.io/"
    affiliations:
      name: None


bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Romance Dawn




# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: justify;
    text-justify: inter-word;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: justify;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
  div {
    text-align: justify;
    text-justify: inter-word;
  }
---
## Romance Dawn

There was a time during high school where my history teacher asked the class on our thoughts regarding the greatest invention in history. The light bulb and the World Wide Web were among some of the more common responses, and while I do see the value and impact of such inventions in propelling societies forward and changing the human condition, my mind had wandered somewhere else entirely.      

"What are your thoughts?" my teacher finally asked me; I was the last person to be called on.

Without much reluctance, I bluntly said, "Calculus."

Immediately following my remark, my peers looked at me in disbelief, thinking that they must have misheard what I had said. My rationale lies in that since the Scientific Revolution, calculus have enabled us to understand the dynamics of the natural world via myriad applications from medicine to engineering, in ways that perhaps neither Isaac Newton nor Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz could have possibly imagined when they first conceived it. Yet in retrospect, it seems that my peers did not have the same interpretation toward calculus as what I had in mind; after all, calculus is often synonymous with dread or agony for those who are not interested in mathematics. While our answers were nowhere near what my history teacher was hoping to hear, i.e. Johannes Gutenberg's printing press, it did made me realize that there is an underlying sense of interpersonal epistemological dissonance between myself and others, whereby there is a contradiction in the perceived value of knowledge and its nature. Thus, it dawned upon me that the problem, of note, stems from the ways with which knowledge is mentally represented in the public consciousness and the emotional connotations that are associated with individual knowledge claims.

As a premature academic invested in research and teaching, I often find myself being intrigued by many disparate things beyond the realm of my own area of research, i.e. translational neuroscience, including but are not limited to cosmology, quantum physics, pure mathematics, game theory, philosophy, literature, artificial intelligence, and their relations with one another, if any exist. Indeed, perhaps it is my diverse set of interests that originally drew me to something as interdisciplinary as neuroscience, where I could discover its intricate connections with other (un)related ideas and concepts. Sadly, it is not within my power to study all of these things in-depth in the course of one's lifetime, for I am not a Renaissance man like da Vinci by any means. Nevertheless, having a layman's understanding of the said topics is sufficient to stimulate and engage my mind in the domains of unacquired knowledge insofar as challenging my present understanding and perception with respect to the natural world. Considering the volume of intellectual knowledge that exists since the inception of time, this blog is a tabula rasa for recording them in the Lockean sense, even if it is just an infinitesimal amount. It is also worthwhile to mention Tim Urban, who writes the blog [Wait But Why](https://waitbutwhy.com/), as a source of inspiration in subconsciously compelling me to explore the fine line between what we do know and what we do not know about the world, allowing me to appreciate the ingenuity of mankind through my own narratives. For these reasons, in an attempt to return to the initial question, it is my firm conviction that the human mind, from which knowledge is derived, is the greatest invention in history (the Dualist might come after me for making the bold assertion that the mind is invented, so I will abruptly end the post here).<d-footnote>See Richard Rorty's book Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature for a detailed discourse on the mind as an invention; as for counterarguments, Thomas Nagel's essay What Is It Like to Be a Bat? offers one such example.</d-footnote>

*Note:* The thumbnail of this post is a Feynman diagram representing the annihilation of an electron-positron pair to render the emission of a photon followed by photodisintegration to reform the electron-positron pair ([Image Source](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1107.0434)).
