---
layout: distill
title: On the Fermi Paradox and the Era of Extraterrestrial Contact
description: Are we alone in the universe? Where are the aliens? Are they good or evil? Etc.
giscus_comments: true
date: 2024-01-04
thumbnail: assets/img/horsehead.jpg

authors:
  - name: Kelvin Chen
    url: "https://k9chen.github.io/"
    affiliations:
      name: None


bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: A Dot in the Universe
  - name: Solitude Explained
  - name: A Dark Forest
  - name: Bayesian Games
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Aliens as Gods
  - name: Moral Reawakening
  - name: We Are Cockroaches


# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: justify;
    text-justify: inter-word;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: justify;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
  div {
    text-align: justify;
    text-justify: inter-word;
  }
---
## A Dot in the Universe

All of us are tiny specks of stardust floating amid a dark void of space; our universe is much like a grand pointillist painting comprised of a multitude of colorful, ubiquitous dots in the form of stars, planets, nebulae, asteroids, and other astronomical objects. The conservative belief that Earth is the only (unique) place in the universe to contain intelligent life with technological capacities--the [Rare Earth hypothesis](https://www.cambridge.org/core/services/aop-cambridge-core/content/view/66BF2364A85A6EE6FB4E8CE617899711/S1473550410000030a.pdf/div-class-title-numerical-testing-of-the-rare-earth-hypothesis-using-monte-carlo-realization-techniques-div.pdf)--is quite absurd, albeit the apparent limited empirical evidence to refute this claim ought to be acknowledged as we are currently governed by the physical, temporal, and sociological constraints of the [Great Silence](https://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1983QJRAS..24..283B). Nevertheless, it is only a natural proclivity for our curious minds to ponder upon what is out there and to comprehend the incomprehensible as it outweighs our fear of the unknown, even if our efforts were to no avail.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/horsehead.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The Horsehead Nebula in the Orion constellation. Image by <a href="https://stocksnap.io/author/srahn">Stephen Rahn</a> on <a href="https://stocksnap.io">StockSnap</a>.
</div>

Considering the current progress of spacefaring technology and the work done by organizations such as [NASA](https://www.nasa.gov/) and [SETI](https://www.seti.org/) thus far, the possibility of making extraterrestrial contact with aliens does not appear to be as bright as those portrayed in typical sci-fi stories about extraterrestrial intelligence. Our inability to discover extraterrestrial life is thus the principal issue of the [Fermi paradox](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780323913607000124), a question that was inspired by Enrico Fermi in 1950 during a lunchtime conversation with his fellow physicists. Since then, and even before Fermi asked the famous question of "where is everybody,"<d-footnote>Fermi's exact remarks were not clear as it was different across the letters written by his colleagues, which included Edward Teller, Herbert York, and Emil Konopinski when they recalled the conversation.</d-footnote> the Fermi paradox has been scrutinized by Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Michael H. Hart, Frank J. Tipler, and along with their respective supporters and critics. At the start, the thought of there being extraterrestrial intelligence beyond the confines of Earth seemed rather bleak. Yet, given our sense of probability, our intuition informs us otherwise, as demonstrated through the formulation of the [Drake equation](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/abs/drake-equation/introduction/90D48C581EA5B6F83F3641132989C86B) by Frank Drake to render a probabilistic estimation of the number of alien civilizations within the Milky Way based on detectable EM radiations, e.g., radio signals, as denoted by $$ N $$:

\begin{equation}
N = R_* \cdot f_p \cdot n_e \cdot f_l \cdot f_i \cdot f_c \cdot L
\end{equation}

where $$ R_* $$ is the rate of star formation, $$ f_p $$ is the fraction of those stars with planets, $$ n_e $$ is the number of planets with a suitable life environment, $$ f_l $$ is the fraction of those suitable planets that can bear life, $$ f_i $$ is the fraction of those life-bearing planets on which intelligent life exists, $$ f_c $$ is the fraction of those intelligent civilizations that possess the technology for interstellar communication, and $$ L $$ is the length of time such civilizations can actively maintain their method of communication. Furthermore, the [Seager equation](https://www.cambridge.org/core/services/aop-cambridge-core/content/view/C714F4FD72D50FF029131C6E5AAB1946/S1473550417000052a.pdf/search_for_habitable_planets_with_biosignature_gases_framed_by_a_biosignature_drake_equation.pdf) is a variant of the classical Drake equation<d-footnote>A statistical generalization of the classical Drake equation based on the Central Limit Theorem has also been proposed by Claudio Maccone, in which each parameter is transformed into a random variable.</d-footnote> that is based on the detection of biogenic gases in lieu of EM radiations.

Of course, the Drake equation has its own pitfalls in terms of its difficulty in estimating certain parameters (i.e., $$ f_i $$, $$ f_c $$, and $$ L $$) and relying on heavy numerical assumptions, hence generating either optimistic or pessimistic results; for instance, a group of Oxford scientists claims the probability of us being alone in the universe to be [39%--85%](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.02404). While seemingly discouraging, it is sufficient to provide us with some degree of confidence that there is indeed a likelihood for extraterrestrial contact, regardless of how small $$ N $$ might turn out to be in the final analysis, especially when taking into account the fact that everything above the scale of our galaxy is ignored in the original mathematical formulation of the model and other Drake-like equations. After all, we can only begin to visualize the bigger picture beyond the cosmological horizon by connecting all the dots there is; we are not meant to exist in solitude.

## Solitude Explained

For decades, various theoretical explanations have been posed to address the Fermi paradox, either denying the existence of extraterrestrial intelligence or offering solutions to explain the non-occurrence of extraterrestrial contacts, most of which have been rather optimistic in supporting the latter. One early theory is the [Zoo hypothesis](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0019103573901115), a sociological explanation placed forward by John A. Ball asserting that from the perspective of extraterrestrial intelligence, Earth is akin to a galactic zoo such that unbeknown to us, we are being observed while the aliens purposefully hide themselves from our eyes. One problem that the said hypothesis suffers from, however, is the [monocultural fallacy](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/26), where, for the Fermi paradox to be dissolved, a set of rules must be in place to be adhered by every independently evolved extraterrestrial civilization to keep the zoo in a state of non-interference, albeit this solipsistic synchrony among all extraterrestrial civilizations is quite pragmatically unlikely in the absence a pre-emptive, dominant civilization to play the role of zoo keepers to enforce the rules, notably when there are a large number of extraterrestrial civilizations in existence. It has also been posited that contact would ultimately occur in the event that the animals of the zoo have reached a certain level of technological maturity; this would be conceivable as it is only a matter of time, yet due to the fact that we are hardly a Type I civilization<d-footnote>Earth is presently sitting at roughly Type 0.7 on the Kardashev Scale; assuming an energy consumption rate of 3% per year, it would take roughly 100-200 years for Earth to reach Type I status.</d-footnote> on the [Kardashev Scale](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-38351-y#:~:text=Humanity%20presently%20stands%20at%20Type,energy%20consumption%20models%20are%20oversimplified.)--making us ineligible to join the '[Galactic Club](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0016328721001105)'. To gauge our Kardashev type $$ K $$ based on our capacity to consume energy, Carl Sagan proposed the following formula utilizing logarithmic interpolation:

\begin{equation}
K = \frac{\log_{10}P - 6}{10}
\end{equation}

where $$ P $$ is the amount of power that a civilization uses. In application, for a civilization to achieve $$ K = 2 $$ requires an energy of the order of $$ 10^{26} $$ watts, which would be feasible if energy can be harnessed from a large star like the Sun through hypothetical megastructures such as the joint-utilization of [Dyson spheres](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.16734.pdf) and [Matrioshka brains](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.16734.pdf). Indeed, it would not be a surprise if a highly developed civilization on the Kardashev Scale (i.e., $$ K > 3 $$) is capable of harnessing dark energy from black holes; even more so, it is also theoretically possible for such a civilization to manipulate the fabric of space-time at the microdimensional scale.<d-footnote>The extent of inward manipulation (i.e., genes, molecules, quarks) that a civilization is capable of is opposite to the measure employed by the Kardashev Scale; space-time manipulation is the highest level of inward manipulation as defined by John D. Barrow.</d-footnote> Thus, extraterrestrial contact appears to be out of the question as of now.

Another hypothesis that aims to resolve the Fermi paradox is an idea crafted from the minds of Robin Hanson, known as the [Great Filter](https://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/greatfilter.html), which is essentially a temporal barrier that impedes the development of life forms at some point along the evolutionary continuum, beginning with the onset of abiogenesis to the establishment of, say, a Type III civilization. The Great Filter may be better described as some kind of a freak accident, such as the evolution of multicellular eukaryotes from their unicellular ancestors, which unironically took approximately two billions years--a rather rare phenomenon. To our curiosity, it has been speculated as to where the Great Filter lies relative to our present time, as well as how many of such filters there are in the history of life. The Fermi paradox clearly made it seem as though the Great Filter had already passed, reinforcing the Rare Earth hypothesis. If this was not true or perhaps there are additional filters in the impending future that has yet to occur, this would be problematic for humanity because a possible Great Filter in the future could mean planetary destruction following a doomsday scenario, e.g., starving to death from a nuclear winter or getting killed by an army of [von Neumann probes](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/international-journal-of-astrobiology/article/von-neumann-probes-rationale-propulsion-interstellar-transfer-timing/5202679D74645D3707248FE5D5FA0124)<d-footnote>The destruction of an intelligent civilization by von Neumann probes is the central idea behind the Berserker hypothesis.</d-footnote> sent from extragalactic space. Either way, the point of the Great Filter is that it is an onerous task to make contact with extraterrestrial life when they cannot evolutionarily develop in a similar manner as us humans or they have already been wiped out from the face of the universe. It has also been speculated that we are presently undergoing an [astrobiological phase transition](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11084-008-9149-y)--a period of disequilibrium succeeding a cataclysmic reset event, e.g., a $$ \gamma $$-ray bursts impacting our galaxy, in the astrobiological time scale of the universe, in which the birth of new intelligent life has yet to arrive apart from our own civilization, henceforth making us among the first batch of intelligent life in this presumably dead universe.    

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/bomb.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    An Oppenheimerian vision of world destruction from a nuclear holocaust. Image by <a href="https://pixabay.com/users/wikiimages-1897/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=63146">WikiImages</a> on <a href="https://pixabay.com//?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=63146">Pixabay</a>.
</div>

One other solution that is closely related to the Great Filter is explained by [superlinear scaling](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsif.2022.0029). In this hypothesis, a civilization would inevitably approach a singularity in which population and energy demands cause infinite growth in a finite amount of time, effectively leading to an asymptomatic burnout characterized by the collapse of the civilization as productivity and resource consumption scale superlinearly; this growth can be modeled by the following [ODE](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.0610172104):

\begin{equation}
\frac{dG(t)}{dt} = \left(\frac{Y_0}{E}\right)G(t)^\beta - \left(\frac{R}{E}\right)G(t)
\end{equation}

where $$ \frac{dG(t)}{dt} $$ represents the rate of civilization growth with respect to time $$ t $$, with $$ Y $$ being a measure of the material resources required to sustain the civilization while $$ R $$ is the resources needed per capita on average, $$ E $$ is the resources needed, on average, for adding a new individual to the civilization, and $$ \beta $$ is the superlinear scaling exponent that is reflective of the general socioeconomic dynamics across the civilization, e.g., encroaching upon other worlds. In cases where $$ \beta > 1 $$, a singularity arises as the demand for resources becomes infinite in an uncontrolled population where $$ G $$ increases in a superlinear fashion, instigating a drastic regression as the energy supply is exhausted. Given the omnipresence of the dataome, the plausibility of this hypothesis is evident in our daily lives in which our experiences are saturated with information due to the interplay among technological agents and globalization, thereby increasing the value of $$ \beta $$.

To mitigate the occurrence of a singularity as a result of superlinear scaling, the parameters of the growth equation must be reset by means of innovations within the civilization to allow for a new growth trajectory; however, if $$ \beta > 1 $$ still holds true, another singularity would occur in a dreaded cycle and eventually, with time, the frequency of growth would increase in conjunction with a decrease in the time scale between innovations until the overall system collapses from an asymptomatic burnout. The point at which such burnouts occur is thus the Great Filter for humanity. Though to prevent a potential collapse necessitates a homeostatic awakening such that the civilization must come to a realization of its imminent fate prior to collapsing. In some cases, the time that is needed for such realizations to be made may precede the time of the burnout, resulting in a positive time window that can facilitate the civilization to implement systematic changes that would alter the course of its internal dynamics to favor homeostasis, such as abandoning the desire for cosmic colonialism and supremacy to reduce energy demands. Regardless of the outcomes, it is within the interest of the civilization in question to remain silent; as the proverb goes, silence is golden. Therefore, detecting extraterrestrial intelligence only becomes increasingly challenging from a remote distance, like playing hide-and-seek in a dark room, except the room is as far and wide as the universe.  

> "I'm sure the universe is full of intelligent life. It's just been too intelligent to come here." ― Arthur C. Clarke

## A Dark Forest

The list of solutions in response to the Fermi Paradox is extremely extensive. One particular solution that is of intrigue is provided by David Brin, wherein a civilization would annihilate another civilization to acquire the latter's resources for its own territorial expansion in accordance with [Darwinian fitness](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0040580907000676?via%3Dihub), provided that it has the technological means to do so. In the Drake equation, parameters such as $$ f_i $$ would thus decrease in value under such circumstances. In a universe where the amount of resources is finite, such predator-prey relations are bound to happen, and naturally, any civilization harboring the fear of annihilation by another civilization with a predatory nature would choose to make its existence unknowable, and this key notion serves as the crux of the Dark Forest hypothesis--alluding to the sci-fi trilogy *Remembrance of Earth's Past* written by Liu Cixin, featuring a technologically superior alien civilization called Trisolarans and their contact with Earth by means of interstellar invasion, where Earth is at risk of total annihilation by the hostile Trisolaran race after intercepting Earth's broadcasted radio signals. As elegantly explained in the series,   

> "The universe is a dark forest. Every civilization is an armed hunter stalking through the trees like a ghost, gently pushing aside branches that block the path and trying to tread without sound. Even breathing is done with care. The hunter has to be careful, because everywhere in the forest are stealthy hunters like him. If he finds other life--another hunter, an angel or a demon, a delicate infant or a tottering old man, a fairy or a demigod--there’s only one thing he can do: open fire and eliminate them. In this forest, hell is other people. An eternal threat that any life that exposes its own existence will be swiftly wiped out. This is the picture of cosmic civilization."

Obviously, the Dark Forest hypothesis does not portray the universe as a fun playground unlike some of the more optimistic interpretations to the Fermi paradox. It is therefore unwise for civilizations (like us) to broadcast signals out into space to advertise their exact location, especially taking into account the fact that our civilization cannot create something as advanced and ingenious as quantum-entangled, proton-sized sentient supercomputers with light-speed capabilities<d-footnote>In the series, these are known as sophons made from the unfolding of 11-dimensional protons into 2-dimensional sheets with a strong interaction-induced etched circuitry, after which the proton sheet is folded back into its 11-dimensional form.</d-footnote> for espionage purposes as the Trisolarans did; this idea of the universe as a dark forest shares the same motivation as the aforementioned hypotheses about remaining silent to promote survival, which could suggest the existence of a plethora of extraterrestrial civilizations and explain the lack of detectable signals from space.  

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/forest.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The universe as a figurative dark forest. Image by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@rosiesun?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Rosie Sun</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/photography-of-forest-1L71sPT5XKc?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>.  
</div>

Interestingly, the Dark Forest hypothesis presents us with another paradox: It is well-aware that we may be at risk of being annihilated upon being discovered, yet we continue to engage in activities such as sending messages out into space, beginning with the [Arecibo message](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0019103575901165) of 1974. The ethics of doings so has been heavily debated, with Stephen Hawking who once made the comparison of aliens contacting Earth to Christopher Columbus arriving at the Americas. Of course, the latter ended with a history of enslavement, bloody massacres, and viral diseases for the Native Americans. The ramifications of extraterrestrial contact can thus be easily imagined; after all, it would be a foolish idea to shout into the dark forest as if we are asking for our own demise.    

## Bayesian Games

In [game theory](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B0080430767006057), the Dark Forest hypothesis and the behavior of alien civilizations can be modeled via a [sequential game with incomplete information](https://www.jstor.org/stable/2297414?seq=1). Let us first suppose a game involving civilizations A and B (henceforth referred to as $$ C_A $$ and $$ C_B $$, respectively) as the players, such that they are both aware of each other's existence and are technologically capable of destroying one another; this is a scenario in which both civilizations are given complete information about each other and the game is played in its [extensive form](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-69291-1_14#:~:text=A%20game%20in%20extensive%20form,and%20also%20occur%20in%20Chaps.). Prior to the game, two axioms are established as follows which are directly derived from Liu's conceptualization of the dark forest:

1. Survival is the primary need of civilization.
2. Civilization continuously grows and expands, but the total matter in the universe remains constant.

$$ C_A $$ begins the game where it can choose to either i. destroy the other civilization or ii. stay silent. In the case of i, this results in a positive payoff for $$ C_A $$ but a negative payoff for $$ C_B $$; in contrast, a zero payoff is resulted in the case of ii. If ii turns out to be the chosen case, it follows that $$ C_B $$ now has the opportunity to destroy $$ C_A $$ by choosing i; otherwise, the game would continue infinitely if $$ C_B $$ were to choose ii until one of the them is destroyed by the other. By backward induction, it is thus clear that the [subgame perfect Nash equilibrium](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1023/A:1020945525108.pdf) would be to have $$ C_A $$ destroy $$ C_B $$ at the first very round to prevent $$ C_B $$ from have a turn to destroy $$ C_A $$.  

Now let us consider a different extensive-form game that takes place in a Bayesian setting, in which both civilizations are unaware of each other's existence and are thus provided with incomplete information to evaluate their respective payoffs. $$ C_A $$ begins the game where three choices are available: i. destroy the other civilization (provided that their existence is known), ii. broadcast a signal to reveal its existence, or iii. stay silent. The only viable options for $$ C_A $$ are either ii or iii since it does not know the existence of $$ C_B $$ (yet); choosing the former could put $$ C_A $$ at risk of being destroyed by $$ C_B $$, whereas the latter would guarantee $$ C_A $$'s survival. The [perfect Bayesian equilibrium](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/002205319190155W#:~:text=Perfect%20Bayesian%20equilibrium%20and%20sequential%20equilibrium%E2%98%86&text=PBE%20is%20equivalent%20to%20sequential,types%20with%20posterior%20probability%20zero.) would thus be for $$ C_A $$ to choose iii to avoid the potential outcome of being destroyed by $$ C_B $$. Logically, the dominant strategy for $$ C_A $$ to deploy in both scenarios is to follow the above axioms of the Dark Forest hypothesis.          

## Aliens as Gods

transcendance hypothesis



> "It is pointless to worry about the possible malevolent intentions of an advanced civilization with whom we might make contact. It is more likely that the mere fact they have survived so long means they have learned to live with themselves and others. Perhaps our fears about extraterrestrial contact are merely a projection of our own backwardness, an expression of our guilty conscience about our past history: the ravages that have been visited on civilizations only slightly more backward than we." ― Carl Sagan


Quote break.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/sky.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    It is no wonder as to why we are attracted to the night sky; it is ever so mysterious. Image by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@grakozy?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Greg Rakozy</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/silhouette-photography-of-person-oMpAz-DN-9I?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>.  
</div>
